the type of people who have been drawn
to veganism disproportionately are
believers in crazy conspiracy theories
crackpot economics extreme left-wing
hyper and there's a lot of very lazy
anti-capitalist thinking going on in
Venus and veganism is not alone in this
it's not unique or isolated Cambridge
University as the soul is illusion yo
what up many of the problems we have
within the intellectual ghetto of 21st
century vegan politics are basically the
same as the problems you have in the
larger intellectual ghetto of planet
Earth or western academia or what have
you
I'm gonna play you some clips from a guy
called the vegan anarchists who I know
watches this channel and he sent me some
messages in the past he is saying many
of the same things that I have heard
presented in formal academic contexts by
people with PhDs at Cambridge University
at Oxford University in Cambodia white
people with PhDs in Cambodia who are
still pro-communist etc and he does say
it in a somewhat more blunt and
ill-mannered way
however the ideas really are the same
and he is a young man who openly
identifies as being diagnosed with
Asperger's syndrome so I just say do not
fault him too much for his manner of
speaking and let's have the good grace
to focus instead on the content of what
he's saying and first wanna make is do
you know that for every homeless person
there are six of battered houses so we
have no bed
how's the opponent people six houses in
America for us a country that has over
bunnies of homes and yet active homeless
people homes what get you to see me calm
would give you confidence that it would
won't give let's say more people are
starting to food so this is a great
example of how in politics the type of
thinking we have to do is often
counterintuitive there is logic in the
social sciences there is the use of
logic but it is also very easy to be led
astray by logic alone or by looking at a
social science statistic in isolation
that way taking for granted that the
number he's given is correct it doesn't
really matter there is a very large
number of empty houses in the United
States there is also a very large number
of houses empty houses abandoned houses
in Canada why is it that we can't simply
solve homelessness through utilizing
those abandoned houses the answer is
very simple access to employment in a
country like Canada or the United States
which in some ways these are different
from you know Luxembourg the different
from small densely populated countries
in Europe more so there similarities
places like Australia we have huge parts
of Canada that have declining
populations a factory closes down a mine
closes down you have a small town in the
middle of Saskatchewan in Canada and
when the mine closes all the houses
become abandoned there is no way you can
look at the unemployed population poor
people homeless people in the city of
Chicago and just say oh we're gonna give
you the ownership of these abandoned
houses that are in a small town that
used to have a mine or you set up a
factory and where that is now closed
down
it may seem logical it may seem
intuitively obvious by looking at a
number on a piece of paper that you can
just solve the dilemma of homelessness
by reassigning abandoned houses to poor
people but you can't
now this is only one reason why the
other reality is if you actually get
into it and look at what an abandoned
house is you have to have quite a lot of
wealth stored up to be able to take an
abandoned house and make it habitable in
the vast majority of cases yes there are
exceptions you might find one or two
abandoned houses in downtown Chicago
that could be repurposed for this type
of use and that does happen all the time
charities within capitalist societies
buy up abandoned houses and use them to
help poor people that's been going in
cities like Detroit that's been going on
since forever
you know it's a very common form of
religious outreach once the house has
become abandoned and very cheap
charities get involved with doing
exactly that however on a large scale
when you're talking about hundreds of
thousands or tens of thousands of
abandoned houses um if you walk up to a
homeless person who's in downtown
Chicago and say hey we're gonna give you
on paper the ownership of an abandoned
house in a former industrial town or a
former mining town in the middle of
Saskatchewan or the middle of Ohio where
you have no ability to earn a living you
have no ability to improve yourself in
any way oh and before you can move into
that house currently there's no running
water you know you'll actually have to
spend thousands of dollars improving the
the plumbing getting the water working
again getting the electricity working
again improving the fixtures you know
getting rid of the rats and other
problems possibly fixing the roof
abandoned houses take capital take large
amounts of money to be invested in them
to make them habitable again this is a
generalization but any of you have
practical experience will know this is
true and the cost to refurbish an
abandoned house is in many cases higher
than providing a homeless person with a
subsidized apartment or access to
housing and housing project or access to
a shelter in the downtown core of a city
and in the downtown core of that city
they may have access to education
programs an unemployment office
employment opportunities what have you
so already with these very
very few observations you see why in
countries like the United States and
Canada social outreach generally has
followed the pattern that's already
familiar to us and why we haven't been
reassigning abandoned houses that are
themselves again when you get into large
numbers tell you what thousands of event
houses we yeah Canada's fold that we
have failed uranium mining towns that
used to be a uranium mine uranium mining
stop being profitable the whole town
turns into abandoned housing what do you
want to do with it
it's a chronic problem for the
government of Canada I know Australia
and the United States also have this
ghost town phenomenon on an enormous
scale and even when you're not talking
about remote rural locations or small
towns when you look within one city
uh-huh yeah United States today I think
you still have a huge number of
abandoned houses in the happy city of
New Orleans we're finding at finding
employment is is difficult the best of
times what do you want to do with those
houses if you give them to people who
are destitute people are homeless and
poor those people you can hand them the
ownership of a house in New Orleans on
paper the only thing they can do with
that piece of paper is go to a bank and
try to sell it to someone else who has
the money to take that abandoned house
and make it habitable again so these the
dynamics in understanding politics in
thinking politically there's a very
peculiar form of counterintuitive
thinking that has to go on which is not
just unique to the social sciences it's
unique to the overlap between politics
and economics and I'm not boasting to
say I'm one of the small number of
people who is really good at this mode
of thinking because I listen to lectures
from elite institutions not just by
going down visited elite universities
but you know London School of Economics
you can download academic lectures
directly from their website every so
often London School of Economics has
people with PhDs who are on the far left
who are communists or anarchists leftist
anarchists making these same sorts of
arguments and they're just as easily
refuted I mean again this young man you
know doesn't have all the the advantages
of those people
given those lectures at Cambridge Oxford
London School of Economics but the
arguments are the same they are I've
heard these same arguments from people
wearing fancy suits speaking with fancy
accents and they're just as easily
refuted the orgy of ignorance that was
Occupy Wall Street brought all this
crackpot pseudo economic theory to the
fore and this is still what's haunting
the Internet and it's still haunting the
community of what I call early adopters
within veganism today but I mean this
this is the type of misconception that
Shores up anti capitalism as a sort of
air SATs ideology basically
supply-demand going to mention the fact
that capitals must show neither merely
give homeless people homes despite the
fact that you only have ability gives us
six abandoned houses for the one
homeless guy and yeah and the people
waste food so veganism it's so for and
war hunger but we abolish capitalism and
animal in the animal industry then we
defeat the world hunger
so um many of the weaknesses here stem
from the core concept of anti capitalism
itself now it's certainly fine to offer
a critique of capitalism without posing
an alternative the same way I can offer
a critique of a diet without proposing a
better diet I can simply point out
what's wrong with somebody's diet and
say hey whether or not I'm not a dietary
expert myself but I can see some
problems this so you know critique is
always welcome however the real
historical alternatives to capitalism
that are being kind of veiled here are
for example communism and feudalism and
it is false to problematize capitalism
as if by removing capitalism from this
equation the problems he's describing
will disappear ok
apply and demand do you actually think
that was not a problem under communism
it was with disastrous results do you
think waste was not a problem under
communism it was with disastrous results
including millions of people starving
simultaneous with that same waste it is
very sobering for anyone on the Left to
look at the real economic and social
history of Agriculture of agricultural
production in Russia in China even in
small-scale examples of communist
societies like Laos Cuba or what have
you
there are many sobering and indeed
terrifying lessons to be learned so
there there's a real intellectual
laziness in just talking about anti
capitalism here and of presuming that by
removing capitalism from the equation
you will revert to a system that solves
all these problems well even under
feudalism feudalism in a meaningful
sense is not capitalism and is not
communism it's a fundamentally different
social system including that it's
fundamentally different in relation to
agriculture uhm these problems you're
iterating do you think they they're
absent in historical feudalism which is
a pretty well documented you know easy
to study easy to examine social system
yes the problem of government subsidy to
meat production and dairy production are
you familiar at all with the history of
the Soviet this is an enormous aspect of
Soviet cultural and economic identity at
the same time that people were were
literally starving to death in terrible
numbers totally follow me go bean and
balls catabolism too started using
Africa I want you to see a piece of
grain that's been saved
um well there's really quite a lot of
evidence to the contrary and again you
can look at the historical reality of
communism you can look at the historical
reality of communism providing aid in
Africa
which happened not just Russia but China
also in a big way was involved in in aid
to Africa
um it's simply not true now and never
has been true that there is a paucity of
grain going to starving people in Africa
from capitalist countries on the
contrary enormous quantities of grain
have been sent to Africa from capitalist
countries under the heading of charity
very simply charity is an aspect of
capitalism capitalism produces wealth it
also produces poverty and it also
produces charity both nationally both
within one country and internationally
so no it's not a perfect system
and unlike communism it doesn't pretend
to be
however communists were in the
deplorable situation of covering up mass
starvation of covering up the horrendous
use of violence especially in
agriculture in food production and of
pretending that a perfect system when
what they had was actually worse than
feudalism the polite term for the
alternative to the capitalist economy
that left-wingers endorsed is called a
command economy if you read ground-level
descriptions of how that command economy
actually worked as early as 1918 in
Russia of you know the Russian army
being sent to villages to you know
extract food from the peasants the
bullying the violence the use of murder
torture rape and the ways in which
peasants had to struggle to try to feed
themselves of course it was especially
terrible in the Ukraine but throughout
Russia throughout the Soviet Union
unbelievably horrible situations during
the periods plural when the Soviet Union
tried to have full communism a full
command economy and tried to command not
just the production of industrial goods
but the functioning of the farms the
result was a humanitarian disaster and
mass starvation was only one element of
that disaster
one of the responses to that even while
Lenin was still alive Lenin you know
ultimately having to recognize the total
economic collapse of communism switched
to what was called the new economic
policy
NEP and that was basically a return to
capitalism and then under that policy
the Soviet Union had all the
disadvantages of a dictatorship and also
all the disadvantages of capitalism and
they called it communism but at least
when they switch to the NEP the problem
of starvation abated and everyone all
the so Vedic economists had to deal with
this seemingly incongruous fact that
capitalism fed people even within Russia
even within Russia's communist period so
much more effectively than communism
that and you have to remember a lot of
people sincerely believed as this young
man did that as soon as as capitalism
was abolished starvation would disappear
from the world starvation and poverty
would cease to be problems now that is
stupid that is naive but it was often
sincere wasn't a cynical ploy for people
who believed at the time today in 2016
it is easier than ever to learn the
lessons of history and one of the ways
that people avoid learning those lessons
of history avoid facing up to the
unbelievably terrible legacy of what
communism did in the past is by using
these intentionally vague terms like
anti capitalism and not really talking
through what it is they're asserting if
you want another anti-capitalist
movement that exists in 2016
take a good hard look at Isis the
Islamic state they want to abolish
banking they want to abolish usury in
some ways that would entail a return to
feudalism not in others I don't think
they're trying to return to feudalism in
every sense but it's certainly that
would be the end of capitalism
capitalism without banking and interest
is not capitalism so that's a very
different kind
social experiment that's going on under
Isis and you can look at of course
commune based societies most of them are
religious
some of them left-wing where people set
up small farms on a non profit communist
basis and I actually know of one an
anarchists coming in like that in Japan
the results look a lot like feudalism
actually the results can be quite scary
and quite hard to endure for the people
involved in them even when they have all
the benefits of living in a capitalist
society because they've created a little
you know utopia or dystopia within a
capitalist society so they have the
benefits of having access to a hospital
of being protected by an army of
actually having all the benefits of a
larger capital society around them but
then of trying to create a commune a
communist society a non-profit
non-semantic so what is the significance
here in this context for vegans of being
so-called anti-capitalist of breaking
the cow shackles of capitalism you know
this very peculiar way you have to learn
to think in dealing with politics and
economics Karl Marx much to the horror
of some of his modern fans was actually
in fever of child labor child labor in
factories I can't say that's a
little-known fact it's seated in desk a
Patel Karl Marx's most famous book that
apparently nobody reads Marx says in
effect that in the future the family
will be forever changed by
industrialization by by communism but
otherwise just by the progress of
history because he saw a future in which
children would be able to work part-time
in factories and go to school part-time
and at an early age
children would become financially
independent from their parents by doing
this kind of part-time factory labor now
there can be no doubt that Marx was
influenced in this by just visiting in
person going on foot to factories in
England
and France Germany at a time when Europe
was in an industrial boom however of
course it's only was only particular
cities within Europe that had this kind
of mass employment available for
children or even for adults
the problem with Marx is that his his
form of economics is never based on
actually running the numbers today
almost nobody believes this or or thinks
that it's a good idea but you know it's
plausible someone could read that in
Karl Marx and think it's a great idea
all right now look at a country like
Canada even if the government supported
this what percentage of children could
actually be employed in part-time jobs
and factories there are many many
problems I mean Karl Marx he may have
visited a major center of Industry like
Liverpool in England and had this idea
that the whole world could be
transformed this way he never sat down
and tried to make an estimate even
within England at that time sort of the
booming of the Industrial Revolution in
England what percentage of England's
children could actually be provided with
employment housing and education in this
way it's a lot less than a hundred
percent in a country like Canada the
amount of industrial employment factory
employment is tiny to begin with the
percentage of those jobs that could be
done by a child on a part-time basis by
child labour is even smaller most people
are shocked when they simply look at the
raw statistic for what percentage of
Americans are actually employed in
agriculture it's it's almost zero
considered as a percentage agriculture
course is tremendously important you
know being a surgeon is also
tremendously important but a very small
percentage of people are employed as
surgeons the fact that something is
important doesn't mean it provides mass
a mass economic phenomenon in this way a
relatively large number of people
actually do engage in part-time
agricultural labour they work on a farm
part-time as children while they're
going to school
you can meet some people like that I've
known some people like that um but again
if you had a utopian idea about this
like Karl Marx did and then you sit down
and do the math and ask yourself okay
how many children could act would it be
feasible to employ in this way
economically socially etc you come to a
totally different set of conclusions so
I'm using this to contrast there were is
this sort of double blindness here in a
sense what Karl Marx was refusing to do
was to look forward was to do do
projections that's an economic
projection pure and simple where you
don't just look around say oh hey a lot
of kids are working in factories in the
future the family unit will be
transformed children will not be
dependent on their parents there will be
mass employment everything will change
this reason you sit down and actually
how many jobs how many children under
what circumstances is that form of
employment actually profitable for the
factory or for the child not every fact
what wages will be paid what what
minimum wages will need to be paid you
know what are all the other elements of
the package today we talk about cluster
analysis in economics um obviously the
school and the government would all have
to be involved in making this possible
you'd probably have to ride a bus that
goes from the school to the factory or
vice-versa again it's it's more than
zero I mean today for high school
students like a very small number of
Susan as' but refusing to do the
projections to look forward and do the
math this is one kind of blindness and
on the other hand there's
refusing to look backward and learn from
history today that's especially dramatic
and we're talking about the failures of
communism but you could even say it in
Karl Marx his own life he wasn't
learning from the the lessons of the
century before him either now among the
many forms of stupidity in the Occupy
Wall Street movement say this orgy of
self-righteous ignorance that poured out
in the streets I met many many people
who
you know and they were on the Internet
and huge numbers - who temporarily
convinced themselves that all of the
problems with capitalism could be solved
by changing the currency back to a gold
standard okay terms of economics you
could test this theory with projections
okay you think going back to the gold
standard is gonna make a big difference
in different categories why don't you
run the numbers why don't you come up
with percentages how much is gonna
change over how many years and what are
the real outcomes you're expecting from
searching petracles in and this also
refusal to learn from history the the
period of the gold standard is
incredibly well documented in economic
history
it wasn't paradise there were
unbelievably terrible economic problems
some of them different from the economic
problems we have today with with fiat
currency go back and look at the history
of the United States Europe etc and how
economies and markets operated with a
gold standard currency the type of
people who have been drawn to veganism
disproportionately are believers in
crazy conspiracy theories crackpot
economics extreme left-wing hype and
there's a lot of very lazy
anti-capitalist thinking going on within
veganism and veganism is not alone in
this it's not unique or isolated
Cambridge University has the same
problem
Cambridge University England is full of
the same intellectually lazy
self-righteous over-the-top left-wing
extremism and Cambridge University is
not unique I think there probably many
other universities where the humanities
departments are so left-wing it's insane
and were these types of pseudoscience
ideas this is within the social sciences
this is pseudoscience like the idea that
you can look at how many houses are
empty and solve homelessness by just
comparing the number of abandoned houses
to the number one with people that is
pseudoscience but if it's pseudoscience
within the social science
yeah those ideas take off and are taken
seriously and are presented at academic
conferences by people wearing ties and
people with PhDs these problems are not
unique to veganism right now they are
over-represented in veganism I had a
couple emails with a young woman who is
actually conservative and vegan she is a
religious conservative and watching her
videos talking about veganism and
talking about her life and so on I've
got to say it was a little bit thrilling
for me I'm seeing the other side because
I wrote her we have to be he comes back
and forth I said to her look you know
I'm really accustomed to the type of
critique I get from left-wing people um
I I think I'm kind of in the center in
most countries I'm not left-wing I'm not
right I'm you know I don't fit into the
political spectrum here at all I said
but actually no I have no idea how
conservatives feel about me and what I
have say about politics because I never
meet any of them you know I never hear
from any of them as like you know
boy it's sort of mildly fascinating to
see the world from the perspective of a
vegan conservative you know you know
both religious conservative American if
you believe that veganism is for
everyone then it's not just for
socialists it's not just for anarchists
it's really for everyone and those
voices are gonna come into play and
conversely you know it's no surprise to
me that the same debates that go on
within decadent white Western academia
are going on within veganism also it's
not a surprise to me but I guess it is a
bit of a disappointment
I would like to imagine that the the
type of realism that unites us as vegans
the type of realism that doesn't just
look at a farm with cows standing around
happily and say this is fine there's no
problem here the type of realism says no
there's more to the situation there's a
whole cycle of suffering there's a whole
cycle of production there's a whole
cycle of exploit a
there's an ecological and ethical
problem here if you can do that and
that's what makes us vegan that's what
united says is vegan right if you can
look at industrialized animal
agriculture and respond in that way with
that kind of critical thinking I would
like to think you're more likely or more
likely to or more capable of looking at
other problems in society with that same
sort of lifecycle analysis ethically
ecologically and otherwise I don't see a
lot of signs of that yet I guess I'm
still hopeful that veganism is not going
to turn out to be a disaster in the same
way that a narco primitivism was that
the old-fashioned anarchist ecology was
of just 15 years ago or so back in the
year 2001